### From Genetic Data to Medicine

Over the last decade, enormous progress has been made on recording the
health state of an individual patient down to the molecular level of
gene activity and genomic information – even sequencing a patient’s
genome for less than 1000 dollars is no longer an unrealistic goal.
However, the ultimate hope to use all this information for personalized
medicine, that is to tailor medical treatment to the needs of an
individual, remains largely unfulfilled. To turn the vision of
personalized medicine into reality, many methodological problems remain
to be solved: there is a lack of methods that allow us to gain a causal
understanding of the underlying disease mechanisms, including gene-gene
and gene-environment interactions. Similarly, there is an urgent need
for integration of the heterogeneous patient data currently available,
for improved and robust biomarker discovery for disease diagnosis,
prognosis and therapy outcome prediction.

### Bringing together Machine Learning and Statistical Genetics

The field of machine learning, which tries to detect patterns, rules and
statistical dependencies in large datasets, has also witnessed dramatic
progress over the last decade and has had a profound impact on the
Internet. Amongst others, advanced methods for high-dimensional feature
selection, causality inference, and data integration have been developed
or are topics of current research. These techniques address many of the
key methodological challenges that personalized medicine faces today and
keep it from rising to the next level. Despite this rich potential of
machine learning in personalized medicine, its impact on data-driven
medicine remains low, due to a lack of experts with knowledge in both
machine learning and in statistical genetics. Our ITN aims to close this
gap by bringing together leading European research institutes in Machine
Learning and Statistical Genetics, both from the private and public
sector, to train 14 early stage researchers.
